[MUSIC]
What if our doctor performing medical
trials was initially very optimistic about
the outcome of each treatment?
This principle of being optimistic
in the face of uncertainty
is a common strategy of balancing
exploration-exploitation.
Today we'll discuss how to implement this
idea using optimistic initial values.
[SOUND] By the end of this video, you will
understand how optimistic initial values
encourage early exploration and
be able to describe some of
the limitations of optimistic initial
values as an exploration mechanism.
[SOUND] Let's consider how
optimism affects action-selection,
using our doctor again as an example.
Perhaps the doctor starts with
the assumption that each treatment is 100%
effective, until shown otherwise.
Our doctor would begin
prescribing treatments at random,
until one of the treatments
fails to cure a patient.
The doctor might then choose from
the other two treatments at random.
Again, the doctor would continue until
one of these treatments fails to work.
The doctor would continue this way, always
assuming the treatments are maximally
effective, until shown that the estimated
values need to be corrected.
Let's see how this work
with explicit values.
Previously the initial estimated
values were assumed to be 0,
which is not necessarily optimistic.
Now, our doctor optimistically assumes
that each treatment is highly effective
before running the trial.
To make sure we're
definitely overestimating,
let's make the initial value for
each action 2.
Let's assume the doctor always
chooses the greedy action.
Recall the incremental update rule for
the action values, shown to the left.
Let's take the alpha = 0.5 for
this demonstration.
The first patient comes in.
Because the values
are all equal right now,
the doctor chooses a treatment randomly.
The doctor prescribes treatment P, and
the patient reports feeling better.
Notice that the estimated value for
treatment P decreased from 2 to 1.5,
even though the treatment was a success.
This is because the reward was 1,
which is less than our initial
optimistic estimate of the value.
The next patient arrives.
The doctor chooses amongst the treatments
with the highest estimated value,
treatment Y or treatment B.
The doctor randomly chooses
to prescribe treatment Y.
The patient reports that they do not
feel better, giving a reward of 0, and
the doctor lowers their
estimated value for treatment Y.
The estimated value decreased to 1,
lower than the current estimated value for
treatment P.
A third patient comes into the clinic.
Treatment B has the highest
estimated value, and so
the doctor prescribes treatment B.
The patient reports feeling better, so
the estimated value only decreases to 1.5.
Patients keep coming in, and the doctor
continually provides treatments and
refines the value estimates.
From this example, we can see that using
optimistic initial values encourages
exploration early in learning.
The doctor tried all three of the
treatments in the first three time steps,
and continued to try all
treatments afterwards.
[SOUND] Let look at another example,
this time the 10-armed
problem from the textbook.
The values for each action are sampled
from a normal distribution.
For this problem, an initial estimated
value of 5 is likely to be optimistic.
In this plot,
all the vales are less than 3.
Whenever the agent selects an action,
the first time that action is selected
the observed reward will likely be smaller
than the optimistic initial estimate.
The estimated value for
this action will decrease, and
other actions will begin to look
more appealing in comparison.
Let's run an experiment to see how
an agent behaves with optimistic
initial values.
As a baseline, we can run an epsilon
greedy agent with epsilon = 0.1,
and initial value estimates set
to 0 which are not optimistic.
We also run a greedy agent with
optimistic initial values.
We plot the percentage of time that
the agent chooses the optimal action,
averaged over runs.
In early learning, the optimistic agent
performs worse because it explores more.
Its exploration decreases with time,
because the optimism and
its estimates washes
out with more samples.
[SOUND] Using optimistic initial values is
not necessarily the optimal solution for
balancing exploration and exploitation.
One limitation is that optimistic initial
values only drive exploration early in
learning, this means agents will not
continue exploring after some time.
This leads to issues in
non-stationary problems.
For example, one of the action values may
change after some number of time steps.
An optimistic agent may have already
settled on a particular action, and
will not notice that a different
action is better now.
[SOUND] Another potential limitation
is that we may not always
know how to set the optimistic
initial values,
because in practice we may
not know the maximal reward.
Regardless of some of these limitations,
optimistic initial values has proven
to be a very useful heuristic.
We will continue using this approach,
often in combination with
other exploration approaches,
throughout the rest of this course.
In this video we discussed the effects
of our initial value function estimates.
We described how optimistic initial
values encourage early exploration, and
we demonstrated this through
a couple of examples.
We finally briefly described some of the
limitations of optimistic initial values.
See you next time,
when we will talk about another strategy
to balance exploration and exploitation.